Background
Interactions among genetic loci are believed to play an important role in disease risk. While many methods have been proposed for detecting such interactions, their relative performance remains largely unclear, mainly because different data sources, detection performance criteria, and experimental protocols were used in the papers introducing these methods and in subsequent studies. Moreover, there have been very few studies strictly focused on comparison of existing methods. Given the importance of detecting gene-gene and gene-environment interactions, a rigorous, comprehensive comparison of performance and limitations of available interaction detection methods is warranted.

Results
We report a comparison of eight representative methods, of which seven were specifically designed to detect interactions among single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), with the last a popular main-effect testing method used as a baseline for performance evaluation. The selected methods, multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR), full interaction model (FIM), information gain (IG), Bayesian epistasis association mapping (BEAM), SNP harvester (SH), maximum entropy conditional probability modeling (MECPM), logic regression with interaction term (LRIT), and logic regression (LR) were compared on a large number of simulated data sets, each, consistent with complex disease models, embedding multiple sets of interacting SNPs, under different interaction models. The assessment criteria included several relevant detection power measures, family-wise type I error rate, and computational complexity. The principal experimental results are as follows: i) while some SNPs in interactions with strong effects are successfully detected, most of the methods miss many interacting SNPs at an acceptable rate of false positives. Overall, the best-performing method was MECPM; ii)The P-value significance assessment, used by some of the methods to control the type I error, is quite conservative, which  limits the detection power of these methods and also makes it difficult to fairly compare them; iii) As expected, power varies for different models and as a function of penetrance, minor allele frequency, linkage disequilibrium and marginal effects; iv) Analytical relationships between power and these factors are derived, which support and help explain the experimental results. v) Main effects play an important role in whether an interacting SNP is detected; vi) Most methods can detect some ground-truth SNPs, but fare poorly at detecting whole interactions.

Conclusion
This comparison study provides new insights into the strengths and limitations of current methods for detecting interacting loci. This study, along with freely available simulation tools we provide, should help support development of improved methods.